# 3. SwiftData

### 3.1. Meet SwiftData (8m)
- SwiftData is a powerful and expressive persistence framework built for Swift. 
- It is a powerful framework for data modelling and management and enhances your modern Swift app. 
- Like SwiftUI, it focuses entirely on code with no external file formats and uses Swift’s new macro system to create a seamless API experience.
**Using the @Model macro**
- @Model is a new Swift macro that helps to define your model’s schema from your Swift code. SwiftData schemas are normal Swift code, but when needed, you can annotate your properties with additional metadata. Using this schema, SwiftData adds powerful functionality to your model objects.
- It’s as simple as decorating your class with @Model, and the schema is generated. Models in SwiftData are the source of truth for your application’s schema and drive the persistence experience. Part of this experience will transform the class’ stored properties and turn them into persisted properties.
- SwiftData natively adapts your value type properties to be used as attributes right away. These properties include basic value types like string, int, and float, but they can also include more complex value types, such as structs, enums, and codable types too, including collections.
- You can influence how SwiftData builds your schema using metadata on your properties.
- @Model modifies all stored properties
- Control how properties are inferred:
  - With @Attribute, you can add uniqueness constraints.
  - With @Relationship, you can control the choice of inverses and specify delete propagation rules.
- Exclude properties with @Transient.

`@Model`
`class Trip {`
    `@Attribute(.unique) var name: String`
    `var destination: String`
    `var endDate: Date`
    `var startDate: Date`
 
    `@Relationship(.cascade) var bucketList: [BucketListItem]? = []`
    `var livingAccommodation: LivingAccommodation?`
`}`

**Two key objects to drive our operations: ModelContainer and ModelContext**
- Model container provides the persistent backend for your model types. You can use the default settings just by specifying your schema, or you can customise it with configurations and migration options.
- With your container set up, you’re ready to fetch and save data with model contexts.
- Model contexts observe all the changes to your models and provide many of the actions to operate on them. They are your interface to tracking updates, fetching data, saving changes, and even undoing these changes.
- In SwiftUI, you’ll generally get the modelContext from your view’s environment after your model container.
- Outside the view hierarchy, you can ask the model container to give you a shared main actor bound context, or you can simply instantiate new contexts for a given model container. Once you have a context, you are ready to fetch data.
- SwiftData benefits from new Swift native types:
  - `Predicate` 
  - `FetchDescriptor`
- As well as significant improvements to Swift’s native `SortDescriptor`.

**Predicate**
- New in iOS 17, Predicate works with native Swift types and uses Swift macros for strongly typed construction.

- SwiftData also makes it easy to create, delete, and change your data by using the ModelContext to drive these operations.
- After creating your model objects like any other Swift classes, you can insert them into the context and begin using SwiftData features, like change tracking and persistence. 


-------

### 3.1. Build an app with SwiftData (18m)
- @Bindable property in the view to adopt Observable.
- New @Observable macro and @Bindable property wrapper allow to effortlessly set up the data flow in an application with even less code than before.
- When a View uses a property of an Observable type in its body, it will be updated automatically when the given property changes.

**Querying models to display in UI**
**@Query (property wrapper)**
- Provides the view with data
- Triggers view update on every change of the models
- A view can have multiple @Query properties
- @Query offers lightweight syntax to configure sorting, ordering, filtering, and even animating changes.
- Under the hood, it uses a model context of the view as the data source.

**modelContainer (view modifier)**
- SwiftUI vends a new view and scene modifier for a convenient setup of the view’s ModelContainer.
- To use SwiftData, any application has to set up at least one ModelContainer.
- It creates the whole storage stack, including the context that @Query will use.
- A View has a single model container, but an app can crate and use as many containers as it needs for different view hierarchies.

**modelContext (environment variable)**
- To access the model context, SwiftUI offers a new environment variable.
- Similarly to model container, each view has a single context, but an app, in general, can have as many as it needs.
- A nice detail about SwiftData is that it autosaves the model context (you don’t need to call `modelContext.save()`).
- The autosaves are triggered by UI-related events and user input.
- There are only a few cases when you want to make sure that all the changes are persisted immediately (for example, before sharing the SwiftData storage or sending it over). In this cases, call `save()` explicitly.

**Document-based apps**
- Document-based apps is a concept used on macOS, iOS and iPadOS. It describes the certain types of apps that allow users to create, open, view, or edit different types of documents. 
- Every document is a file, and users can store, copy, and share them.
- SwiftUI supports SwiftData-backed document apps.
- SwiftData Document-based apps need to declare custom content types. Each SwiftData document is built from a unique set of models and so has a unique representation on disk. 
- When the user opens the deck, we need the operating system to associate the deck format and file extension with our app. That’s why we need to declare the content type.
- SwiftData documents are packages: if you mark some properties of a SwiftData model with the “externalStorage” attribute, all the externally stored items will be a part of the document package.
- To declare a new content type in the operating system, we need to specify the file extension to help to distinguish the docs created by our app from any other docs.
- Because SwiftData documents are packages, we have to make sure our type conforms to com.apple.package.


#wwdc23 #swiftdata
